---
id: cc897900-46bc-47e7-af35-6dcbf7e9310d
title: 'Process Isolation in PHPUnit'
excerpt: 'I was recently writing a unit test for an autoloader when I came across a somewhat unintuitive behavior in PHPUnit.'
author:
  - 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_by: 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_at: 1619481129
---
I was recently writing a unit test for an [autoloader](http://php.net/manual/en/language.oop5.autoload.php "PHP: Autoloading Classes - Manual") when I came across a somewhat unintuitive behavior in [PHPUnit](http://www.phpunit.de "PHPUnit").

One requirement of the test suite was that some test methods had to be run in a separate process since class declarations reside in the global scope and persist until the process terminates. So, I slapped a [@runInSeparateProcess](http://www.phpunit.de/manual/3.4/en/appendixes.annotations.html#appendixes.annotations.runInSeparateProcess "Appendix B. Annotations") annotation in the docblock of a test method with that requirement, ran the test suite... and watched that test method fail because the class was still being declared.

It took some head-scratching and tracing through the source of PHPUnit itself to figure out what was going on. When you run the `phpunit` executable, it's actually instantiating `PHPUnit_TextUI_TestRunner`. The eventual result of this is that the `run()` method inherited by your subclass of `PHPUnit_Framework_TestCase` is called.

Depending on the value of the also-inherited `$preserveGlobalState` instance property, which can be set via the `setPreserveGlobalState()` method, multiple measures are undertaken to preserve the state of the current process. One such measure is including files for all the classes currently defined in that process, which is what was tripping me up because `$preserveGlobalState` has a default value of `true`. `$preserveGlobalState` must contain its intended value _before_ the `run()` method is called. The easiest way that I've found to facilitate this is to override the `run()` method in your subclass, call `setPreserveGlobalState()` there, then call the parent class implementation of `run()`. I've included a code sample below to illustrate this.

```php
class MyTestCase extends PHPUnit_Framework_TestCase
{
    public function run(PHPUnit_Framework_TestResult $result = NULL)
    {
        $this->setPreserveGlobalState(false);
        return parent::run($result);
    }
}
```

So, if you try to use the `@runInSeparateProcess` or `@runTestsInSeparateProcesses` annotations that PHPUnit offers, be aware that the global state will be preserved by default. You will need to explicitly set it to not be so if running tests in separate processes is to have the effect that you are probably intending.

**Update**: `@preserveGlobalState enabled|disabled` can be used in place of what I did in the PHP code itself above. Thanks to Sebastian Bergmann for [pointing this out](http://twitter.com/#!/s_bergmann/status/25809894179348480).