---
id: b6790deb-b433-45f2-bb92-61a3403d8f33
title: 'Ledger Stats'
excerpt: 'Occasionally, I need to take a break from the projects I''m working on. How do I do that? By working on another project, of course!'
author:
  - 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_by: 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_at: 1619570254
tags:
  - ledger
---
Occasionally, I need to take a break from the projects I'm working on. How do I do that? By working on another project, of course!

Just over a year ago, [I found ledger](/2010/07/01/ledger-and-building-it-from-source-on-ubuntu-10-04/ "Matthew Turland » Blog Archive » Ledger and Building It From Source on Ubuntu 10.04") and began using it to manage my household finances. Some people may find that sort of thing boring, but I think it's it neat to look at the past year's worth of transactions, get a bird's eye view of our spending, identify trends, and so forth.

I've had it in the back of my mind lately that I'd like a better and preferably more visual way to do those things. After perusing through a few charting libraries, I found that [Highcharts](http://highcharts.com/ "Highcharts - Interactive JavaScript charts for your webpage") seem to do what I needed. Among other things, it provides a plugin for the the JavaScript library I'm most familiar with: [jQuery](http://jquery.com/ "jQuery: The Write Less, Do More, JavaScript Library").

I already had a bit of [PHP](http://php.net/ "PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor") code lying around to parse ledger's XML output, give me a monthly spending breakdown by account, and output it in CSV format. I lifted the parsing logic, wrote some more PHP to search transactions by several criteria based on form input, implemented a very simple plugin system to consume the search results and output various charts, and wrote a few simple plugins. Thus, [ledger stats](https://github.com/elazar/ledger-stats "elazar/ledger-stats - GitHub") was born.

It's still in a very rough prototypical stage, but it's got enough functionality for others to start playing around with it. Feel free to fork it on GitHub and suggest improvements.