---
id: a0623bf9-56b2-40dc-a934-9b1ef7abfe97
title: 'Monolog, Rollbar, and the Case of the Missing Exception'
author:
  - 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_by: 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_at: 1619476172
excerpt: 'A "gotcha" I ran into when trying to log an exception with Monolog, why it happened, and how I resolved it.'
---
I recently worked on a project that used the [PHP client library](https://github.com/rollbar/rollbar-php) for [Rollbar](https://rollbar.com/?dr). More specifically, I was entasked with upgrading that library from the 0.x version in use to a more recent 1.x version.

One of the features specific to the newer version was an [optional integration](https://github.com/rollbar/rollbar-php#using-monolog) with the popular [Monolog](https://seldaek.github.io/monolog/) logging library, which was already being used by the project I was working on. I thought using this feature would make our code a bit cleaner, so I set about trying to use it.

Within my codebase, there was a line that looked something like this, where `$exception` was an instance of an [`Exception`](https://secure.php.net/manual/en/class.exception.php) subclass:

```php
$this->logger->critical(
    'Uncaught PHP Exception.',
    ['exception' => $exception]
);
```

Upon executing this code and checking the Rollbar dashboard, I found that the `'exception'` [context data](https://github.com/Seldaek/monolog/blob/master/doc/01-usage.md#using-the-logging-context) entry was assigned an empty object, rather than the serialized exception data I was expecting.

It would take me a fair amount of head-scratching and digging through the internals of the Monolog and Rollbar client libraries to figure out what was going on.

## The Serialized Exception

The ultimate issue turned out to be that PHP exceptions don't natively support JSON serialization, and there was no userland logic being executed to handle it.

```php
var_dump(json_encode(new Exception("message", 1)));

/*
Output:
string(2) "{}"
*/
```

If you search the source for Monolog, you'll find that it does include the aforementioned userland logic for serializing exceptions in the form of the `normalizeException()` method declared by `Monolog\Formatter\NormalizerFormatter` and its subclasses `LineFormatter` (which Monolog uses by default when a formatter is requested) and `JsonFormatter`.

So, why wasn't this logic being executed in my case?

## The Missing Formatter

I reviewed the [documented example](https://github.com/rollbar/rollbar-php#using-monolog) of integrating Rollbar with Monolog. Doing this ultimately involves creating an instance of `Rollbar\RollbarLogger`, passing that to an instance of `Monolog\Handler\PsrHandler`, and then adding that handler to your instance of `Monolog\Logger`.

Monolog has two relevant base classes for handlers: [`AbstractHandler`](https://github.com/Seldaek/monolog/blob/master/src/Monolog/Handler/AbstractHandler.php) and [`AbstractProcessingHandler`](https://github.com/Seldaek/monolog/blob/master/src/Monolog/Handler/AbstractProcessingHandler.php). The important difference between the two in this case is that `AbstractProcessingHandler` supports the use of [formatters](https://github.com/Seldaek/monolog/blob/master/doc/02-handlers-formatters-processors.md#formatters) while `AbstractHandler` does not.

As it turns out, `PsrHandler` extends from `AbstractHandler` and does not implement its own support for formatters, so none was being used.

## The New Handler

To address this, I would need a handler that would proxy to the `Rollbar\RollbarLogger` instance as `PsrHandler` did, but also support use of formatters. So I [wrote my own handler](https://github.com/Seldaek/monolog/blob/master/doc/04-extending.md#writing-your-own-handler).

```php
use Monolog\Handler\AbstractProcessingHandler;
use Monolog\Logger;
use Psr\Log\LoggerInterface;

class PsrProcessingHandler extends AbstractProcessingHandler
{
    protected $logger;

    public function __construct(
        LoggerInterface $logger,
        $level = Logger::DEBUG,
        $bubble = true
    ) {
        parent::__construct($level, $bubble);
        $this->logger = $logger;
    }

    protected function write(array $record)
    {
        $formatted = empty($record['formatted']) ? $record : $record['formatted'];
        $this->logger->log(
            strtolower($record['level_name']),
            $formatted['message'],
            $formatted['context']
        );
    }
}
```

Let's break this down.

First, I made my handler extend `AbstractProcessingHandler` rather than `AbstractHandler` as `PsrHandler` does. This gave me access to a `handle()` implementation that supported use of formatters. 

Next, I copied over the `$logger` property and `__construct()` method declarations from `PsrHandler`, which allowed me to pass my `Rollbar\RollbarLogger` instance to my new handler.

Finally, since I wanted to keep the existing `handle()` implementation from `AbstractProcessingHandler()`, and that implementation called `write()` to actually write the log record to its destination, I overrode `write()` to handle sending the record to the `Rollbar\RollbarLogger` instance.

When Monolog uses a formatter, the formatted version of the record is stored back in the record itself with a key of `'formatted'`. As such, I included a check for the presence of a formatted version and used that when available. Otherwise, I simply used the record as-is.

I implemented use of this handler, re-ran the code that logged the exception... and still found an empty object in Rollbar.

## The Correct Formatter

If you look at the source for `Monolog\Formatter\LineFormatter`, you'll find that while it does have a `normalizeException()` method, it doesn't actually call it internally. The method is `protected`, so I can only assume it's intended for potential subclasses to use.

Remember when I said earlier that this is the formatter Monolog uses by default? This explained why, even with my new handler, I still wasn't seeing exception information in Rollbar.

To address this, I modified my handler to instead use `NormalizerFormatter`, which does call its `normalizeException()` method internally.

## Case Closed

Once both the new handler and the `NormalizerFormatter` configuration were in place, I was able to re-run the code and see exception data in Rollbar.

Hope the tale of my journey helps you, or at least proved to be an interesting read!