---
id: b559bc3e-8a7c-4fb8-a6d0-1119e48c0437
title: 'Reduce, Map, and Filter: A Primer'
author:
  - 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_by: 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_at: 1619569940
excerpt: 'In my experience, not enough people have a concrete understanding of the operations mentioned in the title of this post.'
tags:
  - javascript
---
In my experience, not enough people have a concrete understanding of the operations mentioned in the title of this post. This is unfortunate, because these operations are simple but powerful concepts, and a good working knowledge of them can be incredibly useful. If you'd like to learn more about them, I hope you'll read on.

## Your Language Doesn't Matter

One reason why these concepts are useful is because they aren't language-specific.

If your *lingua franca* supports any concept of lists, collections, arrays, or whatever your preferred term is -- offhand, I don't know of a mainstream general purpose language that doesn't support them -- chances are good that language supports these operations in some form.

From popular languages like JavaScript and Python, to more esoteric languages like Haskell and Lisp, to databases like CouchDB, these concepts exist in a lot of languages and other technologies.

For those who prefer code instead of or with exposition, I'll be showing examples in JavaScript (ES6 specifically) partly because I think it's a reasonably well-known and readable language, partly it's my own *lingua franca* at the moment.

## Starting with Reduce

The **[reduce](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reduce)** operation takes a collection of items as input and returns some value as its output.

Reduce as an operation doesn't specify what that output value's nature or type should be. For example, it may be a single scalar value, such as a count of the number of items in the input collection.

```javascript
const count = [1, 2, 3].reduce(
    (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator + 1,
    0
);
// count === 3
```

The example above begins with an array containing three elements: `1`, `2`, and `3`.

It invokes the `reduce()` method of this array, which receives two parameters.

The first parameter is a callback. `reduce()` internally invokes this callback for each element in the original array, and passes that element to the callback as its `currentValue` parameter.

The second parameter of `reduce()` is an optional initial value it passes to the callback parameter `accumulator` the first time it invokes the callback. If you don't specify a value for this parameter, it receives `undefined` as its value.

The first time that `reduce()` invokes the callback above, it passes in a value of `0` for `accumulator` -- because it's the second parameter passed to `reduce()` -- and the first element of the original array, `1`.

The callback then returns `1`, which is the result of the expression `0 + 1` where `0` is the value of `accumulator`.

The second time that `reduce()` invokes the callback, it passes in a value of `1` for `accumulator` (the last return value of the callback) and the second element of the original array `2`.

The callback then returns `2`, which is the result of the expression `1 + 1` where `1` is the value of `accumulator`.

`reduce()` invokes the callback a third time, passing in `2` for `accumulator` (again, the last return value of the callback) and the third and final element of the original array, `3`.

The callback returns `3`, the result of the expression `2 + 1` where `2` is the value of `accumulator`.

The `reduce()` call has invoked the callback for each array element at this point, so it returns the last return value of the callback, which is `3`, the count of the number of elements in the array.

## More Examples of Reduce

This example is somewhat contrived, being that you can get the length of an array in JavaScript by accessing the array's `length` property. Let's look at something more useful.

If the input collection is a list of numbers, the output value of `reduce()` might be the sum of those numbers. Let's see what this looks like.

```javascript
const sum = [1, 2, 3].reduce(
    (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator + currentValue,
    0
);
// sum === 6
```

You may have noticed in the first example that the `reduce()` callback didn't actually use `currentValue` in its body; it returned `accumulator + 1`.

This time, for the return value of `reduce()` to be a sum of the numbers in the original array, the callback must add those numbers together. `accumulator` represents the running sum of the numbers, so the callback adds `currentValue` to that and returns the result.

Rather than a long-form explanation as with the first example, here's a table outlining the callback invocations that take place in this example.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Invocation</th>
    <th><code>accumulator</code></th>
    <th><code>currentValue</code></th>
    <th>Callback Return Value</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>1 (<code>accumulator</code> 0 + <code>currentValue</code> 1)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>3 (<code>accumulator</code> 1 + <code>currentValue</code> 2)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>6 (<code>accumulator</code> 3 + <code>currentValue</code> 3)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Let's look at a similar example for finding the product of a list of numbers.

```javascript
const product = [1, 2, 3].reduce(
    (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator * currentValue,
    1
);
// product === 6
```

There are two major differences in this example:

1. The callback uses `*` as its operator for multiplication, instead of `+` for addition.
2. The second parameter passed to `reduce()` is `1` for multiplication instead of `0` for addition; see the [identity property](https://www.basic-mathematics.com/identity-property-of-multiplication.html) and the invocation summary below for why this is.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Invocation</th>
    <th><code>accumulator</code></th>
    <th><code>currentValue</code></th>
    <th>Callback Return Value</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>1 (<code>accumulator</code> 1 * <code>currentValue</code> 1)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>2 (<code>accumulator</code> 1 * <code>currentValue</code> 2)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>6 (<code>accumulator</code> 2 * <code>currentValue</code> 3)</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Map: Reduce Redux

Examples up to this point have output a single integer value. Recall earlier when I said this:

> Reduce as an operation doesn't specify what that output value's nature or type should be.

Thus, the output value may instead be another collection of some kind. This is true in the case of `map()`.

The **[map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Map)** operation takes a collection of items as input and returns a collection of the same length wherein each element is the return value of a callback that receives a corresponding element from the input collection.

Let's take our same array of three elements and use `map()` to derive arrays containing multiples of each of the original elements.

```javascript
const doubles = [1, 2, 3].map(currentValue => currentValue * 2);
// doubles === [2, 4, 6]

const triples = [1, 2, 3].map(currentValue => currentValue * 3);
// triples === [3, 6, 9]
```

If you have a good understanding of `reduce()`, it may be easier to understand `map()`, which is actually a specific application of `reduce()`.

Though JavaScript has supported `map()` for as long as it's supported `reduce()`, it's useful to look at what a hypothetical `map()` [polyfill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyfill_(programming)) would look like.

```javascript
if (!Array.prototype.map) {
    Array.prototype.map = function (callback) {
        return this.reduce(
            (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator.concat([
                callback(currentValue)
            ]),
            []
        );
    };
}
```

Let's unpack what's going on here.

First, we define `map()` as a new method of the `Array` prototype. This method takes a single parameter, `callback`.

The body of `map()` invokes `reduce()`. For the initial value of `accumulator`, it specifies an empty array `[]`.

The callback passed to `reduce()` takes `accumulator`, which is an array, and returns the result of calling its `concat()` method, which concatenates another array to `accumulator` and returns a new array representing the result.

The concatenated array contains a single element, which is the return value of a callback that receives `currentValue`.

The ultimate effect of this is that `map()` returns a new array where each element is the result of applying a callback to an element of the original array.

## Filter: Reduce Redux, Part Deux

The **[filter](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Filter)** operation takes a collection of items as input and returns a collection of equal or lesser length wherein each individual element, when passed to a given callback, will result in that callback returning `true`.

Let's use our same three element array in an example where we get all elements of the original array that are greater than `1`.

```javascript
const greaterThanOne = [1, 2, 3].filter(
    currentValue => currentValue > 1
);
// greaterThanOne === [2, 3]
```

Like `map()`, `filter()` is also a specific application of `reduce()`. Let's look at a hypothetical polyfill for it.

```javascript
if (!Array.prototype.filter) {
    Array.prototype.filter = function (callback) {
        return this.reduce(
            (accumulator, currentValue) => callback(currentValue) ? 
                accumulator.concat([currentValue]) : 
                accumulator,
            []
        );
    };
}
```

This example is much like the polyfill example for `map()`, but the body of the callback passed to `reduce()` is different.

First, the body invokes `callback` and passes `currentValue` to it.

If the return value of `callback` is `true`, the body returns the concatenation of the array `accumulator` with a single element array containing `currentValue`.

If the callback return value is not `true`, the body returns `accumulator` as-is.

The effect of this is that `filter()` returns a new array containing a [subset](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subset) of the elements from the input array where the given callback returns `true` for each element in that new array.

## Reduce in Reverse

`reduce()` has a complementary method, `reduceRight()`, that works in much the same way that `reduce()` does. The difference between the two is that, instead of iterating over elements in a forward fashion from the start of the array as `reduce()` does, `reduceRight()` iterates in a backward fashion from the end of the array.

To illustrate this, let's look at an example. Say that we wanted to write an implementation of [`reverse()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array/Reverse) that doesn't operate on the original array [in-place](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm). We can do this with either `reduce()` or `reduceRight()`.

```javascript
// with reduce()
Array.prototype.reverseCopy = function () {
    return this.reduce(
        (accumulator, currentValue) => [currentValue].concat(accumulator),
        []
    );
};

// with reduceRight()
Array.prototype.reverseCopy = function () {
    return this.reduceRight(
        (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator.concat([currentValue]),
        []
    );
};

const reversed = [1, 2, 3].reverseCopy();
// reversed === [3, 2, 1]
```

The implementation that uses `reduce()` has to handle reversing the order of the list by effectively prepending each item to `accumulator`.

The `reduceRight()` implementation is already receiving items in the reversed order, so it appends them to `accumulator`.

## On Purity

To someone who hasn't used these operations much, more [procedural](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procedural_programming) or [imperative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperative_programming) code like this may look more familiar.

```javascript
let result = [];
items.forEach(currentValue => {
    result.push(callback(currentValue));
});
return result;
```

Such a person would probably also notice that code like this is absent in previous examples. This is because they use a more [functional](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming) style.

The above code approximates the `map()` operation. It does so by defining a variable `result`, looping through an array `items`, and using `push()` method to mutate `result` by adding the return value from applying `callback` to `currentValue`.

The difference is that the code above is mutating the value of `result`, whereas previous examples perform no state mutation. Instead, they use [pure functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function) to represent the result as an expression.

This mitigates the need to keep track of state in a program, reducing the [likelihood of bugs](https://hackernoon.com/mutability-leads-to-suffering-23671a0def6a) that often stem from state mutation.

## Chaining Calls

Because each of the operations we've discussed is a method of arrays, we can chain them together much like using the [UNIX pipeline](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pipeline_%28Unix%29) to specify the output of one operation as the input of the next.

Let's say that we want to take our list of numbers, quadruple them, find the multiples that are greater than five, and sum them.

```javascript
const result = [1, 2, 3]
    // quadruple the numbers
    .map(currentValue => currentValue * 4)
    // find the multiples greater than 5
    .filter(currentValue => currentValue > 5)
    // sum the results
    .reduce(
        (accumulator, currentValue) => accumulator + currentValue,
        0
    );

// result === 20
```

If you understand what each individual operation does, then you understand what this chained call does.

## On Efficiency

If you're dealing with a large collection of items and/or a large chain of operations, each call in the chain will iterate over all items in the collection at that point in the call chain, which may pose an efficiency problem.

While doing so may involve state mutation, you can improve efficiency in this situation by consolidating callbacks from your chain into a single `reduce()` call. Let's see how this works by rewriting the previous chaining example.

```javascript
const result = [1, 2, 3].reduce(
    (accumulator, currentValue) => {
        const multiple = currentValue * 4;
        if (multiple > 5) {
            return accumulator;
        }
        return accumulator + multiple;
    },
    0
);
```

The `reduce()` callback in this version effectively does everything that the other callbacks in the previous example do: multiplies the original value by four, checks if it's greater than five, and if so, adds it to a rolling sum.

This version involves a single iteration over the original three elements, where the previous example involved that plus an iteration over the three elements to filter them and an iteration over the filtered two elements to sum them. This isn't worrisome for so small a data set, but it might be for a larger one.

While efficiency is important, ease of readability also isn't something to undervalue. Remember, [premature optimization is the root of all evil](https://stackify.com/premature-optimization-evil/).

## Conclusion

Hopefully, this post has given you food for thought about how these operations work and how to use them effectively. I encourage you to investigate other concepts from functional programming. I firmly believe that, regardless of what your *lingua franca* may be, these concepts can prove useful even in languages that focus on other paradigms, and that they ultimately make you a better programmer. Thanks for reading!