---
id: 4ba4846f-1371-430d-b7f5-fd6f8fb49d3d
title: 'A New Start'
excerpt: 'Nearly four years ago, the current incarnation of this site came to be. Since then, as they''re wont to do, my needs and wants have changed...'
author:
  - 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_by: 58305525-d036-4657-bce6-1b7091fe031d
updated_at: 1619578846
tags:
  - meta
  - content-management
  - php
---
Nearly four years ago, the current incarnation of this site [came to be](/2017/05/13/a-fresh-start/). Since then, as they're wont to do, my needs and wants have changed, and the current solution is ill-suited to fulfilling them. I thought I'd write this post as a way of soliciting suggests for a better approach.

**I still prefer a static site generator over a hosted CMS.** I don't think I would want to go back to a solution of the latter type, such as [WordPress](https://wordpress.org). I'd rather stick with using a SSG, even if it's not the one I wrote, [Scribing](https://github.com/elazar/scribing).

**I'd prefer to stick with PHP.** It's still my *lingua franca* and I like being able to easily extend or otherwise tweak my solution as needed. However, I'm not opposed to switching languages if it means the solution is relatively frictionless.

**I'd rather a relatively simple templating solution.** [Plates](http://platesphp.com) has served my pretty well, and I wouldn't mind sticking with it. I'm not opposed to switching to something with decent support, like [Twig](https://twig.symfony.com/). Beyond that, I'd probably prefer to switch to something language-neutral, like [Mustache](https://mustache.github.io/).

**I enjoy writing content in Markdown.** I'd like to continue doing so. That said, if I have to do a manual one-time migration of my existing content to a particular flavor of Markdown used by my new solution, I'm not opposed to it.

**I want to move away from Travis.** Its GitHub Pages support has served me well, but between increasing build times and [pricing changes](https://blog.travis-ci.com/2020-11-02-travis-ci-new-billing), I think it's outlived its usefulness for me. I've considered trying to migrate to GitHub Actions, but...

**GitHub Pages has also lost its luster.** I miss being able to get a sense of the traffic on my site. The UI for Google Analytics has become increasingly unintuitive, and I haven't found a great alternative to it. None of these solutions can give me information like whether my Atom feed is being used. The only alternative I can see is running my own low-cost server somewhere to host the site, having it capture access logs, and then analyzing them myself.

**I want a better visual design.** The current design is readable, but not visually engaging at all. I want the site to better reflect me as a person. If the new solution has decent premade themes available, so much the better. I'd like something using [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) to make it easy for me to customize.

So, what do you think? Any suggestions on any of the above points? Feel free to [contact me](/contact) via e-mail or Twitter, or [create a discussion](https://github.com/elazar/elazar.github.io/discussions) on GitHub. Thanks in advance for your feedback!